
Notification Service for E-Commerce Platform

This project implements a scalable notification service for an e-commerce platform. The service allows for sending targeted notifications to specific users (e.g., order updates) and broadcasting notifications to all users (e.g., promotional offers). The system operates entirely on the web, providing real-time notifications using WebSockets, with an easily extendable architecture to support future notification sources.


---

Table of Contents

1. Overview


2. Features


3. Technologies Used


4. Getting Started


5. API Endpoints


6. Real-Time Notifications


7. Scalability Considerations


8. Future Improvements




---

Overview

The goal of this project is to build a notification service for an e-commerce platform. This service allows users to receive real-time notifications about order updates, promotions, and other events, either targeted to them or broadcast to all users. The notification system is designed to be easily extendable, supporting multiple notification sources and providing a high level of scalability.


---

Features

Targeted Notifications: Send notifications to individual users based on specific actions, like order status updates.

Broadcast Notifications: Send notifications to all users, such as site-wide promotions or announcements.

Real-Time Delivery: Notifications are delivered in real-time via WebSockets.

API Integration: RESTful API endpoints to send, fetch, and mark notifications as read.

Scalable Architecture: Designed to handle high volumes of notifications and support future growth.



---

Technologies Used

Node.js: JavaScript runtime environment to build the backend.

Express.js: Web framework for handling HTTP requests and API routing.

Socket.io: Library to enable real-time, bidirectional event-based communication.

HTML/CSS/JavaScript: Frontend for displaying notifications.

Postman: API testing tool for simulating requests and debugging.



---

Getting Started

Prerequisites

Ensure that you have the following installed on your system:

Node.js (v14+)

Postman (for testing APIs)


Installation

1. Clone the repository:

git clone https://github.com/your-username/notification-service.git
cd notification-service


2. Install dependencies:

npm install


3. Start the server:

node index.js


4. Open index.html in your browser to see real-time notifications.



Running the Project

The server will run on http://localhost:3000.

Frontend (notifications UI) will be displayed in your browser by opening the index.html file.



---

API Endpoints

1. Send Notification (POST /api/notifications/send)

This endpoint sends a notification, either to a specific user or to all users.

Payload for Specific User

{
  "target": "specific",
  "userId": "12345",
  "message": "Your order #123 has been placed.",
  "source": "order_service",
  "timestamp": "2024-09-25T14:48:00Z"
}

Payload for All Users

{
  "target": "all_users",
  "message": "Don't miss our site-wide sale!",
  "source": "marketing_service",
  "timestamp": "2024-09-25T14:48:00Z"
}

2. Fetch Notifications (GET /api/notifications/:userId)

Fetches all notifications for a given user.

Example Response

[
  {
    "message": "Your order #123 has been shipped.",
    "status": "unread",
    "timestamp": "2024-09-26T10:00:00Z"
  }
]

3. Mark Notifications as Read (POST /api/notifications/read)

Marks a list of notifications as read for a specific user.

Payload

{
  "userId": "12345",
  "notificationIds": ["notif_001", "notif_002"]
}


---

Real-Time Notifications

The system uses WebSockets (via Socket.io) to deliver notifications to the frontend in real-time. Notifications are displayed immediately in the user's browser as soon as they are received by the server.

How it Works:

1. The server listens for new notification events.


2. When a new notification is received, it is sent through the WebSocket connection.


3. The frontend listens for these WebSocket messages and updates the notification display dynamically.




---

Scalability Considerations

The system is designed with scalability in mind to handle an increasing load of notifications. Here are some strategies to scale:

WebSockets vs Polling: WebSockets are used for real-time notifications, avoiding the constant polling of the server, which reduces unnecessary load.

Caching: Implement caching mechanisms (e.g., Redis) to store frequently accessed notifications, reducing database hits.

Load Balancing: Use load balancers to distribute the traffic between multiple server instances.

Message Queues: Use a message queue (e.g., RabbitMQ) to handle spikes in notifications and ensure smooth delivery.
